---
title: Witness nodes
---

A witness node is a lightweight node which functions as a data node but which
does not store or replicate data. It is used to allow a PGD cluster which uses
Raft consensus to have an odd number of voting nodes and therefore be able to
achieve a majority when making decisions.

## Witness Nodes within PGD groups or regions

One typical use of witness nodes is when a PGD group has two data nodes but
resources are not available for the recommended three data nodes. In this case,
a witness node can be added to the PGD group to provide a third voting node to
local Raft decision making. These decisions are primarily about who will be
electing a write leader for the proxies to use. With only two nodes, there could
be no consensus over which data node could be write leader. With two data nodes
and a witness, there would be two candidates (the data nodes) and three voters
(the data nodes and the witness) normally, and when a data node was down, there
would still be two voters able to select a write leader.

## Witness Node outside regions

At a higher level, witness nodes can be used when there are multiple PGD groups
mapped to different regions. For example with three data nodes per-region in two
regions, while running normally allows all six data nodes to participate in Raft
decisions and obtaining DDL and DML global locks. Even when a data
node is down, there are sufficient data nodes to obtain a consensus. But if a
network partition occurs and connectivity with the other region is lost, then
there are now only three nodes out of six available, which is not enough for a
consensus. To avoid this scenario, a witness node in a third region can be
deployed as part of the PGD cluster. This witness node will allow a consensus to
be achieved for most operational requirements of the PGD cluster while a region
is unavailable. 

